 But what made this night different were the dreams that
disturbed my sleep.
I found myself shopping for groceries in a big American-style
supermarket. As I worked my way through my list—fruit, Kleenex, more
fruit, a loaf of bread, a container of milk, still more fruit—I was startled to
discover that the items were somehow disappearing from my cart more
quickly than I could find them and stack them in the basket.
After having this dream repeatedly throughout the night, I gave up trying
to sleep. I got up, gulped a cup of coffee and got dressed in the predawn
dark, and wound my way through the empty Paris streets to my office near
the Champs Elysées to prepare for that day’s program.
I would be spending the day with one of the top executives at Peugeot Citroën,
preparing him and his wife for the cultural adjustments they’d need to make
in their upcoming move to Wuhan, China. If the program was successful, my
firm would be hired to provide the same service for another fifty couples
later in the year, so there was a lot at stake. Chen, a thirty-six-year-old Paris-based
journalist from Wuhan, worked for a Chinese newspaper.
My confidence in Chen had been
bolstered by our preparatory meetings. Articulate, extroverted, and very
knowledgeable, Chen seemed perfect for the job.
Monsieur and Madame Bernard arrived, and I installed them on one side
of the big glass rectangular table with Chen on the other side.
As the morning wore on, I explained each dimension of the key
issues, answered the Bernards’ questions, and carefully kept an eye on Chen
so I could help facilitate his input.
He didn’t open his mouth, move his body forward, or raise his
hand. Apparently he had no example to provide. Not wanting to embarrass
Chen or to create an awkward situation by calling on him when he was not
ready, I simply continued with my next point.
Finally, although I didn’t want to create an awkward moment in
front of the client, I decided to take a chance. “Bo,” I asked, “did you have
any examples you would like to share?”
Chen sat up straight in his chair, smiled confidently at the clients, and
opened up his notebook, which was filled with pages and pages of typed
notes. “Thank you, Erin,” he replied. “I do.” And then, to my utter relief,
Chen began to explain one clear, pertinent, fascinating example after
another.
The truth is that the story of Silent Bo is a story of culture, not
personality. But the cultural explanation is not as simple as you might think.
Chen’s behavior in our meeting lines up with a familiar cultural stereotype.
Westerners often assume that Asians, in general, are quiet, reserved, or shy.
As Chen spoke, the cultural underpinnings of our misunderstanding
became vividly clear to the Bernards—and to me. It was obvious that they
go far beyond any facile stereotypes about “the shy Chinese.” And this new
understanding led to the most important question of all: Once I am aware of
the cultural context that shapes a situation, what steps can I take to be more
effective in dealing with it?